# Final-Year-Project- 

## Recurrent Sequence Motif Destruction Caused by Somatic Mutations in Cancers


### Abstract 
The large size of the human genome makes it susceptible to various sources of damage that can accumulate over time and initiate cancer[2]. As a result, mutations may be found in “mutational hotspots” and described as recurrent across the genome. We looked at an evolutionarily conserved protein, CTCF, and investigated where somatic mutations occurred within the versatile binding sites using a large dataset provided by the Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in Cancer(COSMIC)[3] and CTCF binding sites from CTCFSDB 2.0,[4]. Our results showed a significant enrichment of somatic mutations within CTCF binding sites compared to the expected background mutation rate across the genome. Specific genomic locations of recurrent CTCF binding sites were found in SFRP4, PRAMEF2, ZC3H13, and CD300E. We investigated the frequency and proportion of somatic mutations across different cancer types. Although no particular cancer type showed a high proportion of occurrence, chi-square tests revealed significant associations between mutations in CTCF binding sites and several cancer types, including lung, brain, and colorectal cancers. Our findings show the importance of investigating the impact of sequence motif destruction within CTCF bindings sites. The identification of recurrent mutations and their associations with specific cancer types may  help us find potential biomarkers for cancer diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment prediction.

### Introduction 
In 2020 alone, cancer has accounted for 19.3 million new cases and 10 million deaths worldwide. [5]. Defined as a complex myriad of diseases, cancer emerges when precancerous cellular clones undergo mutations that select for malignant transformation. Cancerous phenotypes are reliant on the local environment, where an accumulation of genetic and epigenetic mutations lead to an increased rate of cell division and decreased rate of differentiation and cell death[1,2,6]. Depending on the type of cancer, this process can be triggered by two different mechanisms. Non-inherited mutations, or somatic mutations, may result from mutagenic drivers that are directly causing oncogenesis or from increased genomic instability caused by the gradual accumulation mutations during a lifetime [7-9].  As each cancerous clone with the malignant phenotype replicates, the probability for further oncogenic transformation increases. [1]. This has been prominent in advanced stages of cancer that are found to contain cancerous cells with multiple oncogenic mutations that exhibit malignant phenotypes[1,2]. Consequently, cells exhibiting higher mutation rates develop into cancer at an accelerated rate compared to those with lower mutation rates, showing the impact of mutational burden[10]. As a result, characterising and identifying somatic mutations remains a continuous challenge[1,9].

The human genome is inherently unstable and susceptible to both endogenous and exogenous sources of damage that can lead to occasional imperfect replication, causing mutations that contribute to oncogenesis [2,8]. This vulnerability is particularly evident in the most common cancers that exhibit a high degree of mutational signatures, such as skin melanomas with a high degree of C > T transitions caused by UV radiation exposure, and lung tumours with a degree of G >T transversions caused by tobacco smoke[1] . To combat mutational errors, cells have evolved to have mechanisms that repair the damage, such as apoptosis and senescence. A particularly important DNA repair mechanism is the Homologous Recombination Repair(HRR) Pathway. When HRR becomes deficient, back-up repair pathways that are less efficient are used to repair genetic mistakes, accumulating mutations overtime that may lead to cancer[11]. Another strategy for preventing cancer is the hierarchical organisation of cells that have evolved to minimize cancer incidence. Considered a prime mutational hotspot for cancer initiation, stem cells are positioned in specialized niches that protect from the local environment, as seen in blood stem cells residing in the bone marrow[6]. These cancer preventions adaptations have evolved to combat the ample opportunities for mutations to occur along the human genome.

Despite this, unrepaired DNA damage can persist as permanent somatic mutations in cellular clones and their subsequent clones[12]. Somatic mutations are classified based on their level of genetic variations. The first class comprises minor genetic alterations, including small Structural Variants(SVs), such as single-base substitutions(SBSs) and Insertions and Deletions(Indels) [13].  The second class, comprising large SVs, is less frequent than small SVs and include a subclass of Copy Number Variation(CNVs) which include deletion and duplications that further include translocations, inversions, recombination, and reciprocal pairing subclasses(Fig. 1) [13,14]. Although both classes contribute to genomic instability, this project focuses on analysing SBSs due to their prevalence and relative simplicity, specifically the recurrence of these SBS mutations along the genome, that are present in cancers. 

Cancer development undergoes an evolutionary course, where selective pressures that sustain cancer evolution introduce barriers that disrupt the normal function of the cell [6,15]. What selective pressure influences this remains unclear and up to debate. Although it’s believed that positive selection has been acting on  the onset of mutations, the number of recurrent driver mutations reported to be under positive selection has been small[10,16,17]. Williams MJ. et al[16] proposes that oncogenic subclones may undergo neutral selection that further generate passenger mutations. Additionally, Tomasetti C. et al [10] suggest that merely three sequential passenger mutations are enough to initiate cancer. [2,16] . However, when taking the size of the human genome into consideration, the likelihood of identical somatic mutations arising at the same location across different patients is exceedingly low [2]. As a consequence, mutations may be found clustered in “mutational hotspots” and be characterized as recurrent across the genome, at specific locations across multiple cancer patients[2,13]. The presence of such recurrent mutations is important, as it suggests that mutations have a non-random pattern and may have significant implications for cancer development and progression. Numerous genes and pathways have been identified as recurrently mutated  across cancer types, like TP53 gene that has been found to be mutated in more than half of all cancers[17].  

This project aimed to investigate the consequences of recurrent somatic mutations that disrupt and alter sequence motifs in cancer. To explore this, we focused on investigating whether recurrent somatic mutations disrupted the binding sites of an evolutionarily conserved protein, CTCF. CTCF is a multifaced protein, comprised of 11 zinc fingers that can attach to DNA sequence motifs and cell-specific intronic regions. Although it mainly acts an insulator, it can simultaneously also act as either a repressor or a transcriptional activator when interacting with enhancers, silencers, and promoters. It is involved in many cellular processes, such as genomic imprinting, X chromosome inactivation, 3D chromatin architecture, local modifications of histone, but mainly acting an insulator [12,18].  Given its critical role, we hypothesized that the presence of somatic mutations within CTCF binding sites would show recurrence, mutations occurring at a higher frequency than it would be expected by chance. Through this investigation, we aimed to shed light on the broader impact of recurrent SBS somatic mutations within functionally important genomic regions and highlight the need for further research on the specific binding sites of CTCF and what role they have in cancer progression. 

### 
